Restructure developer guide and add architecture overview (#1906)
jupyter-book/mystmd: docs/developer.md

---
title: Developer Guide
short_title: Developer Guide
---

## Developer quickstart

These sections help you get started with a development environment for `mystmd` and learn how to contribute to the codebase. Note that `mystmd` is written in [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/).

We start by discussing the project architecture, and give a birds eye view of how the various parts fit together.
Then, we delve into the specific tools you need, and the developer workflow for each part.
Finally, we go over requirements for contributing code back, via GitHub Pull Requests.

(architecture)=
### Architecture

From an author's perspective, `mystmd` can be thought of as a tool which compiles files in [MyST Markdown format](./quickstart-myst-markdown),
a variant of Markdown with several extensions, into books, articles, and websites.
Like other such tools, it can produce static output, such as PDF, docx, or HTML.

However, for a developer it is important to understand that `mystmd` consists of two parts:

1. An engine that converts input documents into an AST (abstract syntax tree).
2. A renderer, that converts that AST into a given output format.

> This model is as applicable to static document conversion:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This model is equally applicable to exporting/converting static documents as well as rich web applications. Here's a workfklow for static documents:
```

```{mermaid}
flowchart LR
  subgraph "<tt>myst build</tt>"
  myfile.md --> AST --> PDF
  end
```

> As it is to producing a rich web application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's a workflow for producing a rich web application:
```

```{mermaid}
flowchart TB
  subgraph "<tt>myst start --headless</tt>"
    subgraph <b>Document conversion</b>
    direction LR
    doc[folder_of/myfile.md] --> ast[AST]
    end
    subgraph <b>Content server</b>
    ast --> content_server[serve AST on http://localhost:3100]
    end
  end
  subgraph "<tt>npm run theme:book</tt>"
    subgraph <b>Theme server</b>
    direction LR
    theme_server[render themed content at http://localhost:3000] --> content_server
    user[User browser] --> theme_server
    end
  end
```

> Walking through this last example, we see that invoking `myst start --headless` converts a set of input files into an AST, and serves up that AST via a content server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Walking through this last example, we see that invoking `myst start --headless` converts a set of input files into an AST, and serves the resulting AST via a content server.
```

> The theme server is a React app that knows how to style data, which it pulls in from the content server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **theme server** is a React app that knows how to style data, which it pulls in from the content server.
```

The user interacts with the React app, which may trigger new fetches from the content server.

#### Project-specific concepts

> `mystmd` is built on top of well known tools in the JavaScript ecosystem, such as A, B, and C for the `myst` CLI or [React](https://reactjs.org/), [Remix](https://remix.run/), and [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) for the theme server.

Reviewer: Unless we can add this content quickly, I suggest we just leave directives like the following and clean them up in future PRs

````
:::{error} to do - document myst CLI toolchain
:::
````

If you are familiar with these tools, you should not find many surprises in the codebase.

> That said, there are a coupld of concepts used *only* in this project, that won't be familiar. These are detailed below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That said, there are a couple of concepts used *only* in this project, that won't be familiar. These are detailed below:
```

#### Concepts: theme server

In the diagram above, we saw that `mystmd` produces websites by converting a set of documents to an AST, by serving that AST via a content server, and then exposing the data to the user via a React webapp that pulls in data from the content server.

:::{error}
Missing:

- describe the render loop, and how render blocks are registered
- explain the ThemeProvider
- explain styling

> :::

Reviewer 3: `myst-theme` has a `MyST` component in the monorepo package `packages/myst-to-react`. This component takes a MyST AST node and renders it as a React tree. In order to dynamically change the components available to `<MyST />`, we use a React [Context](https://react.dev/reference/react/useContext) object that allows us to push global state deeply into the tree. 

The `renderers` state that `MyST` uses is just a mapping of block-type to a mapping of unist "selectors" (like CSS selectors) to renderer functions. The `renderers` state is passed down from the theme (e.g. `themes/book/app/root.tsx`) into a few components before ultimately being passed as a prop to the `ThemeContext`'s `ThemeProvider` that sets the global state used by `<MyST />`.

`ThemeProvider` does several things:
- Stores the renderers
- Stores the link components (so that we can change how links behave for e.g. static builds)
- Stores the method for executing link navigations (so that we can change how this behaves for SPA vs MPA).

Styling is done via Tailwind class names. The tailwind preprocessor is invoked over the code-base, and the class names that it recognises are compiled into CSS that is pulled in via `@myst-theme/styles`.

Reviewer: @stefanv could you give a shot at incorporating this into the text and then I can take a pass for readability? I don't understand some of the concepts that @agoose77 mentions to feel comfortable writing them in the text...

#### Concepts: static conversion

:::{warning}

> I know nothing yet about what this section should say, or whether it should exist.

Reviewer 2: By static, do you mean PDF, latex, etc. or static HTML?

:::

> ### Tools
> 
> `mystmd` is built and developed using:
> 
> - [NodeJS and npm](https://nodejs.org), which provides a JavaScript runtime and package management;
> - [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) for static type checking;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(develop:transforms)=
#### Concepts: MyST Transformers

MyST Transformers are a way to convert an AST node into another type of node. Transformers operate on AST rather than on raw markdown because AST has more standardized structure to work with. For example, consider a markdown link like `[some text](#a-label)`. In MyST Markdown, this defines a **cross-reference** to `#a-label`, but it uses markdown link syntax. We use a MyST Transformer to convert that markdown to a cross-reference AST node like so:

- First parse the markdown `[some text](#a-label)`.
- The result is a MyST AST node for a markdown link.
- Next, search the document AST for any markdown link nodes with a target that starts with `#`. Assume each one is actually meant to be a cross reference.
- For each, run a **Transformer** that converts the Markdown Link node into a Cross Reference node.

Some other uses for Transformers include:

- Lifting metadata from `code-cells` to their parent structures
- Check that figures have alt-texts
- Convert non-standard AST nodes (e.g., ones generated from a custom user directive) into ones that MyST knows how to render[^ex-transform-node].

[^ex-transform-node]: This is a pattern used in e.g. https://github.com/projectpythia-mystmd/cookbook-gallery/blob/main/pythia-gallery.py where an `executable transform` (non-JS transform that communicates over `STDIO` with `JSON`) takes custom `pythia-cookbooks` nodes and converts them (via some HTTP fetch) to a grid of cards by outputting the relevant grid and card AST nodes.

### Tools

`mystmd` is built and developed using:

- [NodeJS and npm](https://nodejs.org), which provides a JavaScript runtime and package management;
- [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) for static type checking;
```

- [ESLint](https://eslint.org/) for code linting;
- [Prettier](https://prettier.io) for code formatting; and
- [Changesets](https://github.com/changesets/changesets) for versioning and changelogs.

```{note}
Below you will see several `npm run x` commands.

> These are simply aliases for other commands, defined in the `package.json` file under "scripts".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are simply aliases for other commands, defined in the [`package.json` file](https://github.com/jupyter-book/mystmd/blob/main/package.json) under "scripts".
```

```

### Developer workflow: myst CLI

The `mystmd` libraries and command line tools are written in [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/), and require [NodeJS and npm](https://nodejs.org) for local development.

:::{warning}

> The `mystmd-py` package is a thin Python wrapper around the `mystmd` bundle that can be installed using `pip` or `conda`. If you have installed `mystmd` this way, it is recommended that you uninstall it before using the local development instructions below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`mystmd-py` package](https://github.com/jupyter-book/mystmd/tree/main/packages/mystmd-py/src/mystmd_py) is a thin Python wrapper around the `mystmd` bundle that can be installed using `pip` or `conda`. If you have installed `mystmd` this way, uninstall it before using the local development instructions below.
```

:::

To do local development, [clone the repository](https://github.com/jupyter-book/mystmd):

```shell
git clone git@github.com:jupyter-book/mystmd.git
cd mystmd
```

Then, install dependencies via npm.
You need to do this each time you pull from upstream, since dependency versions may change:

```shell
npm install
```

Now, build `mystmd`:

```shell
npm run build
```

Optionally, you can link the built executable as your globally installed `mystmd`:

```shell
npm run link
```

```{warning}
The build process uses unix commands that might not work properly on Windows.
When building on Windows, use either WSL or a unix-like shell (such as Git Bash or MSYS2), and make sure that npm is set to use these by default (`npm config set script-shell path/to/shell.exe`).
```

These commands allow you to use the `myst` CLI from any directory; source code changes are picked up after each `npm run build` (executed in the top-level source directory).

### Developer workflow: myst-theme

the [`myst-theme` README](https://github.com/jupyter-book/myst-theme/) provides a more detailed overview of the components of that package.

> Recall from the [architecture overview](#architecture) that `myst-md` is a React web application. It provides theming, and requires a separate content server for data. When developing, the steps are therefore to:

Reviewer 2: Myst-theme is react? Not sure which package you are referring to here. (Also on my phone)

1. Launch a content server
2. Launch the `myst-theme` web application server (this is what you browse to)
3. Run a process to monitor changes and rebuild `myst-theme`

#### Content server

> We need some example data to test our theme against, such as [the example landing page](https://github.com/myst-examples/landing-pages) or ... Clone our data repository and start the content server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need some example data to test our theme against, such as [the example landing page](https://github.com/myst-examples/landing-pages). Clone this example content repository and start the content server:
```

```shell
git clone https://github.com/myst-examples/landing-pages
cd landing-pages
myst start --headless
```

> (The `--headless` flag tells `myst` not to start up the theme server; we want to do that ourselves in the next step.)

Reviewer 2: A note here saying if you visit this site, usually 3100, then all you will see is json and images. It is a static server that could also be served through a cdn, cloud bucket, etc. and be rendered by any theme.

> (The `--headless` flag tells `myst` not to start up the theme server; we want to do that ourselves in the next step.)

Reviewer: I think this addresses @rowanc1's suggestion above but double check it for correctness

```{error}
Can you help me with other good content site examples?

> ```

Reviewer 3: I think this is fine! Otherwise ... the MyST docs perhaps?

Reviewer 2: We should get some more examples over there asap. :)

> ```

Reviewer: IMO we don't need to block this on finding more examples, this is a fine enough example

#### myst-theme server

> We now fire up the `myst-theme` React app, which will "hydrate" itself from the content server.

Reviewer 2: This isn't quite how I would describe it. Hydrate in react means going from server HTML to client side react+interactivity. The app-server fetches from the json from the content-server, and serves HTML, which is hydrated on the client.

> We now fire up the `myst-theme` React app, which will "hydrate" itself from the content server.

Reviewer: I took a stab at writing up @rowanc1 's suggestion above

First, clone the repository and install dependencies:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/jupyter-book/myst-theme/
cd myst-theme
npm install
```

Then, see if you can build the package:

```shell
npm run build
```

> Good. Now let's launch the theme server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the build succeeds, launch the theme server:
```

```shell
npm run theme:book
```

After a while, it should tell you that the server has been started at http://localhost:3000. Browse there, and confirm that you can see the landing-page content.

> Each time after making changes to the myst-theme source, you'll need to recompile. You can do that using `npm run build`, but it may be easier to watch for changes and do that automatically:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each time after making changes to the myst-theme source, you'll need to recompile. You can do that using `npm run build`.

To automatically watch for changes and reload, use the following command:
```

```shell

> npm run dev

Reviewer 2: Could add a note here that you can also watch packages individually by changing directories and running that same command.

```

> 
> ### Practices
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Note that you can run `npm run dev` from within any folder if you'd like to watch individual packages instead of the entire directory structure.

### Practices

```

Commit the changeset file to the repository as a part of your pull request.
You can use `npm run version` to preview the generated changelog.

Our current versioning procedure is a little loose compared to strict semantic versioning; as `mystmd` continues to mature, this policy may need to be updated.
For now, we try to abide by the following rules for version bumps:

- **major**: Backward incompatible change to the underlying supported MyST data. These would be cases where a non-developer MyST user's project or site built with major version _N_ would not work with major version _N+1_. Currently, we never intentionally make these changes.
- **minor**: Backward incompatible change to the Javascript API, for example, changing the call signature or deleting an exported function. These can be a headache for developers consuming MyST libraries, but they do not break MyST content.
- **patch**: For now, everything else is a patch: bug fixes, new features, refactors. This means some patch releases have a huge, positive impact on users and other patch releases are basically invisible.

#### Publishing

> When it's time to make a release, we'll call `npm run version` and review the changelog.

Reviewer 2: , this is completed in GitHub actions when merging to main.

> When it's time to make a release, we'll call `npm run version` and review the changelog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use [this GitHub action for releases](https://github.com/jupyter-book/mystmd/blob/main/.github/workflows/release.yml). Below is a description of some of the major steps to making a release.

When it's time to make a release, we'll call `npm run version` and review the changelog.
```

If all looks good, we call `npm run publish` (an alias for `changeset publish`), which pushes updated packages to the [npm registry](https://www.npmjs.com/) and adds a git version tag.

```{error}
Double check if the above paragraph is correct.

> ```

Reviewer 3: I haven't authored a release myself — @rowanc1 can probably help verify my understanding:

we use a `changesets` workflow that updates a `Release` PR every time a PR containing a `.changesets/XXX` file is merged to `main`. When we merge the `Release` PR, it triggers a release to NPM and PyPI.

Reviewer 2: Yes, you obviously need creds. That is all done in ci!

- `mystmd-py`: a Python wrapper around `mystmd`, which makes it easy to install the tool in a Python environment. It should not be used for development.

**Core Packages:**

- `myst-cli`: provides CLI functionality for `mystmd`. It does not export the CLI directly.
- `jtex`: a templating library ([see docs](https://mystmd.org/jtex)).
- `myst-frontmater`: definitions and validation for scientific authorship/affiliation frontmatter ([see docs](https://mystmd.org/guide/frontmatter)).
- `myst-config`: validation and reading of configuration files.
- `myst-templates`: types and validation for templates (LaTeX, web, and word).

**Markdown Parsing**

- `markdown-it-myst`: markdown-it plugin to handle tokenizing roles and directives.
- `myst-directives`: core directives for MyST.
- `myst-roles`: core roles for MyST.
- `myst-parser`: converts a [markdown-it](https://github.com/markdown-it/markdown-it) token stream to Markdown AST ([mdast](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast)).

**Readers**

- `tex-to-myst`: convert LaTeX to MyST AST.
- `jats-to-myst`: convert JATS XML, a standard for representing papers, to MyST AST.

**Transformers**

> - `myst-transforms`: transformations for use with MyST AST to transform, e.g., links, citations, cross-references, and admonitions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `myst-transforms`: transformations for use with MyST AST to transform, e.g., links, citations, cross-references, and admonitions (see here for more information](#develop:transforms)). 
```

Reviewer: I added a `Concepts` for transformers above

```{error}
Transform them to what?

> ```

Reviewer 3: Transformers ultimately operate on AST because AST is _nicer_ to work with than Markdown code generation. The MyST team think that our AST is the unit of sharing, not the raw Markdonw. 

We internally use AST transforms to do things like convert raw Markdown links into cross-reference nodes, to lift metadata from code-cells to their parent structures, to check that figures have alt-texts, etc.

Technically, one _can_ use a transform to take a "non-shareable" AST (e.g. an AST that was generated by a directive that contains non-standard node types) and convert it into something valid. This is a pattern used in e.g. https://github.com/projectpythia-mystmd/cookbook-gallery/blob/main/pythia-gallery.py where an executable transform (non-JS transform that communicates over STDIO with JSON) takes custom `pythia-cookbooks` nodes and converts them (via some HTTP fetch) to a `grid` of `card`s

Reviewer: I added a bunch of this text to a "concepts" section above

> ```{error}
> Transform them to what?
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

**Export Tools**

- `myst-to-docx`: convert MyST documents to MS Word format.
- `myst-to-jats`: convert MyST to JATS, for use in scientific archives.
- `myst-to-tex`: convert MyST to LaTeX, to be used in combination with our [jtex](https://mystmd.org/jtex) template compiler, to create stand alone LaTeX documents.
- `myst-to-html`: convert MyST to HTML.

**Extensions:**

- `myst-ext-card`: Card directives.
- `myst-ext-grid`: Grid directives.
- `myst-ext-tabs`: Tab directives.
- `myst-ext-reactive`: Reactive directives.

**Miscellaneous:**

- `myst-common`: common utilities for working with ASTs.
- `myst-spec-ext`: extensions to `myst-spec`. used throughout this repository, before pushing upstream.
- `citation-js-utils`: utility functions to deal with citations.
- `myst-cli-utils`: shared utils between jtex, and myst-cli.
- `simple-validators`: validation utilities, that print all sorts of nice warnings.

```{error}
What does "before pushing upstream mean?

> ```

Reviewer 3: We intend that the `.json` files associated with MyST websites (e.g. https://mystmd.org/guide/website-landing-pages.json) is _standardised_. Right now we have the `myst-spec` package written in JSON Schema that builds the TypeScript types we use internally, and define the (AST) specification. 

However, in the earlier phase of MyST development, the feedback loop was made easier by extending this package with TypeScript types, so that MyST internally is working ahead of the "official" schema. This is really not ideal, and we intend to eventually fuse the two packages together, directly authoring TypeScript, and not feel hesitant to version and update our schema. We're getting there, but the big blocker to some of this is upgrading our `unist` type system dependency and the associated ecosystem of packages (like `unist-util-select`).

So, TL;DR we start with easy-to-author changes in `myst-spec-ext`, and gradually "backport" those changes to our official JSON schema.

The user interacts with the React app, which may trigger new fetches from the content server.

#### Project-specific concepts

`mystmd` is built on top of well known tools in the JavaScript ecosystem, such as [unist](https://github.com/syntax-tree/unist) from [unified](https://unifiedjs.com/), [mdast](https://github.com/syntax-tree/mdast), and [citation.js](https://citation.js.org/) for the `myst` CLI or [React](https://reactjs.org/), [Remix](https://remix.run/), and [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) for the theme server.

If you are familiar with these tools, you should not find many surprises in the codebase.

That said, there are a couple of concepts used *only* in this project, that won't be familiar. These are detailed below:

#### Concepts: theme server

In the diagram above, we saw that `mystmd` produces websites by converting a set of documents to an AST, by serving that AST via a content server, and then exposing the data to the user via a React webapp (`myst-theme`) that pulls in data from the content server.

The `myst-to-react` package provides a `<MyST />` component which can render AST into a React tree.

> A React [context](https://react.dev/reference/react/useContext), named ..., is used to push state deeply into the tree, without having to pass it via props.
> 
> :::{error} to do — find name of context
> :::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A React [context](https://react.dev/reference/react/useContext), named `ThemeContext`, is used to push state deeply into the tree, without having to pass it via props.

:::{error} to do — find name of context
:::
```

Author: Committed.

If you are familiar with these tools, you should not find many surprises in the codebase.

That said, there are a couple of concepts used *only* in this project, that won't be familiar. These are detailed below:

#### Concepts: theme server

In the diagram above, we saw that `mystmd` produces websites by converting a set of documents to an AST, by serving that AST via a content server, and then exposing the data to the user via a React webapp (`myst-theme`) that pulls in data from the content server.

The [`myst-theme` repository](https://github.com/jupyter-book/myst-theme/) contains the default themes that ship with MyST, and is an example of a React-based MyST theme.
The [`myst-to-react` package](https://github.com/jupyter-book/myst-theme/tree/main/packages/myst-to-react) provides a `<MyST />` component which can render MyST AST into a React tree.

> A React [context](https://react.dev/reference/react/useContext), named `ThemeContext`, is used to push state deeply into the tree, without having to pass it via props.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A React [context](https://react.dev/reference/react/useContext), named `ThemeContext` (defined [here in the `myst-theme` repository](https://github.com/jupyter-book/myst-theme/blob/main/packages/providers/src/theme.tsx)), is used to push state deeply into the tree, without having to pass it via props.
```
